feat: new testing tutorial (#3760)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/multiplatform/multiplatform-run-tests.md

[//]: # (title: Test your multiplatform app − tutorial)

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create, configure, and run tests in Kotlin Multiplatform applications.

Tests for multiplatform projects can be divided into two categories:

* Tests for common code. These tests can be run on any platform using any supported framework.
* Tests for platform-specific code. These are essential to test platform-specific logic. They use a platform-specific
  framework and can benefit from its additional features, such as a richer API and a wider range of assertions.

Both categories are supported in multiplatform projects. This tutorial will show you how to set up, create, and run unit
tests in a simple Multiplatform project. Then you'll work with a more complex example that requires tests both for common
and platform-specific code.

> This tutorial assumes that you are familiar with:
> * The layout of a Kotlin Multiplatform project. If this is not the case,
    complete [this tutorial](multiplatform-mobile-getting-started.md) to get started.
> * The basics of popular unit testing frameworks, such as [JUnit](https://junit.org/junit5/).
>
{type="tip"}

> ## Test a simple Multiplatform project

Reviewer: Should multiplatform be lowercase? It isn't in a [similar heading](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform-mobile-ktor-sqldelight.html#create-a-multiplatform-project) in the Ktor tutorial but I'm not sure if that is a mistake 🤔 The Rules heading later in the doc also has it in lowercase.

Author: It's capitalized when we underline that it's a Kotlin Multiplatform project, mentioning the technology
Here I agree it's better to make it consistent with the Rules header, and update the Ktor tutorial later

> 1. Check your environment for multiplatform

Author: Well we can make it a separate section, but it would be just one sentence. Copying the whole Set up page seems to much, and you do need all the tools mentioned in that table.

> 1. Check your environment for multiplatform

Author: I think at this point (since this tutorial is about testing, not creating apps) users might already have everything set up. So I suggest making it less direct

> 1. Check your environment for multiplatform

Reviewer: I defer to your expertise in this area 😄

   development. [Install all the necessary tools and update them to the latest versions](multiplatform-mobile-setup.md).
2. In Android Studio, select **File | New | New Project**.

> 3. Select **Kotlin Multiplatform App** in the list of project templates, and click **Next**.

Author: Currently, step 3 combines 2 actions and you propose to combine 3. Why do you think it would be better?

> 3. Select **Kotlin Multiplatform App** in the list of project templates, and click **Next**.

Author: Right, it needs to be updated then. I still don't like combining too many steps in the first item

   ![Mobile Multiplatform project template](multiplatform-mobile-project-wizard-1.png){width=700}

4. Specify a name for your application, and click **Next**.

   ![Mobile Multiplatform project - general settings](multiplatform-mobile-project-wizard-2.png){width=700}

5. Leave the **Add sample tests to Shared Module** option unchecked.

   This option adds extra source sets and sample code to assist you with code testing. However, to understand how to

>    create and configure tests better, you'll add them manually in this tutorial.

Author: That's basically a description that won't be used in the project. We don't ask to take any actions here. It could be a tip, but why do you think it should be a warning?

>    create and configure tests better, you'll add them manually in this tutorial.

Author: We can put it under the image though

>    create and configure tests better, you'll add them manually in this tutorial.

Reviewer: It was to make sure that the reader understood to leave the option unchecked but after reviewing it a second time, I don't think it's necessary.

   ![Mobile Multiplatform project. Additional settings](multiplatform-mobile-project-wizard-3.png){width=700}

6. Keep all other options as is. Click **Finish**.

## Test the common code

1. In Android Studio, switch the view from **Android** to **Project**. This way, you can see the full structure of your
   multiplatform project.

   ![Select the Project view](select-project-view.png){width=200}

2. In `shared/src/commonMain/kotlin`, create a new directory and a Kotlin file, for example, `common.example.search/Grep.kt`.

> 3. Add the following function to your file:

Author: Instead of combining the first 2 steps, I suggest combining steps 2 and 3. WDYT?

    ```kotlin
    fun grep(lines: List<String>, pattern: String, action: (String) -> Unit) {
        val regex = pattern.toRegex()
        lines.filter(regex::containsMatchIn)
            .forEach(action)
    }
    ```

This function is designed to resemble the [UNIX grep command](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep). Here, the function
takes lines of text, a pattern used as a regular expression, and a function that is invoked every time a line matches
the pattern.

### Add tests for your common code

Let's test the common code. Before you can do this, it's necessary to create a source set for common tests,

> which has the [`kotlin.test`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/kotlin.test/) API library as a dependency.

Author: Good point! The idea was to give general instructions on how tests are usually writtten in multiplatform projects. I'll fix the wording

1. Navigate to the `build.gradle.kts` file in the `shared` folder. You'll see that there's already a source set for
   testing the common code. Within its declaration, you have a dependency on the `kotlin.test` library:

    ```kotlin
    val commonTest by getting {
        dependencies {
            implementation(kotlin("test"))
        }
    }
    ```

   Each multiplatform project has a `commonTest` source set by default. This is where the common tests are stored.

2. All you need to do is to create a corresponding folder in your project, which must have the same name. When you
   create a new directory in the `shared/src` directory, the IDE shows a set of standard options:

   ![Creating common test directory](create-common-test-dir.png){width=300}

   In this case, you need a folder called `commonTest` with the `kotlin` subfolder inside.

3. In the `kotlin` folder, create a new `common.example.search` directory and the `Grep.kt` file.

> 4. Update your test file with the following unit test:

Author: Similar to the section above

    ```kotlin
    import kotlin.test.Test
    import kotlin.test.assertContains
    import kotlin.test.assertEquals
    
    class GrepTest {
        companion object {
            val sampleData = listOf(
                "123 abc",
                "abc 123",
                "123 ABC",
                "ABC 123"
            )
        }
    
        @Test
        fun shouldFindMatches() {
            val results = mutableListOf<String>()
            grep(sampleData, "[a-z]+") {
                results.add(it)
            }
    
            assertEquals(2, results.size)
            for (result in results) {
                assertContains(result, "abc")
            }
        }
    }
    ```

> As you can see, imported annotations and assertions are neither platform nor framework-specific.

Author: I'm not sure about this because it's not a tip for future project or steps, just an explanation of the code in the previous step

When you run this test later, a platform-specific framework will provide the test runner.

### Run tests

You can run the test by executing:

* The `shouldFindMatches()` test function
* The `GrepTest` test class

> * The file using the context menu in the **Project View**

Author: All three options are about running the test, first two use the Run gutter icon, one next to the function and the other near the class. The third option is hidden in the context menu of the file. The Project view was selected in the very beginnig of the tutorial, so that should be clear
Please check the wording if it's clearer now

There's also a handy **Ctrl + Shift + R**/**Ctrl + Shift + F10** shortcut. Regardless of the option you choose,

> you'll see a list of targets to run the test on:

Author: I don't think it's obvious from the UI which shortcut to use, it's a nice little tip if you missed this IDE function.
The selection is the same, I double-checked

> you'll see a list of targets to run the test on:

Author: Not exactly, ideally they should look the same as in [IJ docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/performing-tests.html), but I can't figure out the syntax. I'll get back to it

![Run test task](run-test-tasks.png){width=300}

If you select the `android` option, the test will be run using JUnit 4. If you select `iosSimulatorArm64`, the Kotlin
compiler will detect the testing annotations and create a _test binary_. Kotlin/Native's own test runner will execute

> this binary.

Author: I can see why it seems better to convert it into a list, I fixed this paragraph to give more general descriptions.

This interface defines the different checks commonly performed in testing. The API has a default implementation,
but typically you will use a framework-specific implementation.

For example, the JUnit 4, JUnit 5, and TestNG frameworks are all supported on JVM. On Android, a call to `assertEquals()`
might result in a call to `asserter.assertEquals()`, where the `asserter` object is an instance of `JUnit4Asserter`.
On iOS, the default implementation of the `Asserter` type is used in conjunction with the Kotlin/Native test runner.

> When writing tests for common code, remember:
>
> * Always stay within the API. Fortunately, the compiler and the IDE prevent you from using framework-specific functionality.
> * Although the `Asserter` instance is visible, you don't need to use it in your tests.
> * It should not matter which framework you use to run tests in `commonTest`. However, running these tests with each
>   framework you intend to use may help check that your development environment is correctly set up.
> * When writing tests for platform-specific code, it's possible to use the annotations and extensions provided by a

> >   specific testing framework you want to use.

Author: True, I agree that it's better to have a separate section with all the theory than have these tips in common

>
{type="tip"}

## Deep dive into multiplatform testing

### Writing tests for common code

> Consider `CurrentRuntime`, a type that holds the details of the platform on which the code is executed. For example, it
> might have the values "OpenJDK" and "17.0" for Android unit tests that run on a local JVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've already created a test for common code with the `grep()` function. Now let's consider a more advanced common code test with the `CurrentRuntime` class. This class contains details of the platform on which the code is executed. For example, it
might have the values "OpenJDK" and "17.0" for Android unit tests that run on a local JVM.
```

An instance of `CurrentRuntime` should be created with the name and version of the platform as strings, where the
version is optional. When the version is present, you only need the number at the start of the string, if available.

1. In the `commonMain/kotlin` folder, create a new `org.kmp.testing` directory and the `CurrentRuntime.kt` file.
2. Update it with the following implementation:

    ```kotlin
    class CurrentRuntime(val name: String, rawVersion: String?) {
        companion object {
            val versionRegex = Regex("^[0-9]+(\\.[0-9]+)?")
        }
    
        val version = parseVersion(rawVersion)
    
        override fun toString() = "$name version $version"
    
        private fun parseVersion(rawVersion: String?): String {
            val result = rawVersion?.let { versionRegex.find(it) }
            return result?.value ?: "unknown"
        }
    }
    ```

3. In `commonTest`, create the new `org.kmp.testing/CurrentRuntimeTest.kt` file.

> 4. Update it with a platform and framework-agnostic test like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Add the following platform and framework-agnostic test:
```

        }
    
        @Test
        fun shouldHandleNullVersion() {
            val runtime = CurrentRuntime("MyRuntime", null)
            assertEquals("MyRuntime version unknown", runtime.toString())
        }
    
        @Test
        fun shouldParseNumberFromVersionString() {
            val runtime = CurrentRuntime("MyRuntime", "1.2 Alpha Experimental")
            assertEquals("MyRuntime version 1.2", runtime.toString())
        }
    
        @Test
        fun shouldHandleMissingVersion() {
            val runtime = CurrentRuntime("MyRuntime", "Alpha Experimental")
            assertEquals("MyRuntime version unknown", runtime.toString())
        }
    }
    ```

You can run this test using any of the ways [available in the IDE](#run-tests).

> ### Add platform-specific tests

Author: No, I think same beginnings make it harder to skim through the structure
or we need to cut them altogether and leave only unique parts. but this way we're losing verbs that are good for action-style headers

> > Here, the mechanism of expected and actual declarations is used for brevity and simplicity. In more complex code, a

Reviewer: Do you think it would  be helpful to link to: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform-connect-to-apis.html here?

            assertEquals("MyRuntime version unknown", runtime.toString())
        }
    }
    ```

You can run this test using any of the ways [available in the IDE](#run-tests).

### Writing platform-specific tests

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a short introduction explaining that now the reader has covered two common code tests, it is time to create a platform-specific code test?

> > Here, the mechanism of expected and actual declarations is used for brevity and simplicity. In more complex code, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Here, the mechanism of `expected` and `actual` declarations is used for brevity and simplicity. In more complex code, a
```

Author: Here anad below, the keywords are `expect` and `actual`. Not to pollute the text with too much inline code syntax, I sometimes use normal phrases "an expected declaration, "an actual implementation"

> better approach is to use interfaces and factory functions.
>
{type="tip"}

To create an instance of `CurrentRuntime`, declare a function in the common `CurrentRuntime.kt` file as follows:

```kotlin
expect fun determineCurrentRuntime(): CurrentRuntime
```

> The function should have separate implementations for each supported platform. Otherwise, the build would fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function should have separate implementations for each supported platform. Otherwise, the build will fail.
```

> As well as implementing this function on each platform, you should provide tests. Let's see how to do it both on Android

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As well as implementing this function on each platform, you should provide tests. Let's create tests for both Android
```

and iOS.

#### For Android

> 1. In `androidMain`, create a new `org.kmp.testing/AndroidRuntime.kt` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the `androidMain` directory, create a new `org.kmp.testing/AndroidRuntime.kt` file.
```

> 2. Add the actual implementation of the expected function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the `actual` implementation of the expected function:
```

> 2. Add the actual implementation of the expected function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the `actual` implementation of the `determineCurrentRuntime()` function:
```

    ```kotlin
    actual fun determineCurrentRuntime(): CurrentRuntime {
        val name = System.getProperty("java.vm.name") ?: "Android"
    
        val version = System.getProperty("java.version")
    
        return CurrentRuntime(name, version)
    }
    ```

> 3 Use the IDE's suggestions to create the `androidUnitTest/kotlin` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the IDE's suggestions to create the `androidUnitTest/kotlin` directory:
```

![Creating Android test directory](create-android-test-dir.png){width=300}

> 4. Add the `AndroidRuntimeTest.kt` file to the project:

Reviewer: I'm not sure where the `AndroidRuntimeTest.kt` file goes? In the `androidUnitTest/kotlin` directory?

Author: Yes, definitely needs some clarification then

    ```kotlin
    import kotlin.test.Test
    import kotlin.test.assertContains
    import kotlin.test.assertEquals
    
    class AndroidRuntimeTest {
        @Test
        fun shouldDetectAndroid() {
            val runtime = determineCurrentRuntime()
            assertContains(runtime.name, "OpenJDK")
            assertEquals(runtime.version, "17.0")
        }
    }
    ```

> It may seem strange that an Android-specific test is run on a local JVM. This is because these tests run as Local Unit

Reviewer: By "these" tests - do you mean platform-specific tests?

Author: yes, in this case, Android-specific

Tests on the current machine. As described in
the [Android Studio documentation](https://developer.android.com/studio/test/test-in-android-studio), these tests are

> distinct from Instrumented Tests, which run on a device or within an emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different from Instrumented Tests, which run on a device or within an emulator.
```

The **Kotlin Multiplatform App** template project is not configured to support these tests by default. However, it's

> possible to add additional dependencies and folders. You can check out this [Touchlab guide](https://touchlab.co/understanding-and-configuring-your-kmm-test-suite/)
> to add support for Instrumented Tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible to add additional dependencies and folders. To learn about adding support for Instrumented Tests, see this [Touchlab guide](https://touchlab.co/understanding-and-configuring-your-kmm-test-suite/).
```

#### For iOS

> 1. In `iosMain`, create a new `org.kmp.testing/IOSRuntimeTest.kt` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the `iosMain` directory, create a new `org.kmp.testing/IOSRuntimeTest.kt` file.
```

> 2. Add the actual implementation of the expected function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the `actual` implementation of the `determineCurrentRuntime()` function:
```

    ```kotlin
    import kotlin.native.Platform
    
    actual fun determineCurrentRuntime(): CurrentRuntime {
        val name = Platform.osFamily.name.lowercase()
        return CurrentRuntime(name, null)
    }
    ```

> 3. In the same way as for Android, create a folder structure for your iOS tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the IDE's suggestions to create the `iosTest/kotlin` directory:
```

   ![Creating iOS test directory](create-ios-test-dir.png){width=300}

> 4. Add the `IOSRuntimeTest.kt` file to the project:

Reviewer: Where?

    ```kotlin
    import kotlin.test.Test
    import kotlin.test.assertEquals
    
    class IOSRuntimeTest {
        @Test
        fun shouldDetectOS() {
            val runtime = determineCurrentRuntime()
            assertEquals(runtime.name, "ios")
            assertEquals(runtime.version, "unknown")
        }
    }
    ```

## Running multiple tests and reading reports

> At this stage, you have the code for common, Android, and iOS implementations, as well as their tests. You should get a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this stage, you have the code for common, Android, and iOS implementations, as well as their tests. You should have a
```

> ### Run multiple tests and read reports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run multiple tests and generate reports
```

Author: The intended meaning here was to highlight that user should read reports
Maybe "analyze" would fit better here?

Reviewer: Yes! It's just not clear what is "reading" otherwise.

similar directory structure in your project:

![Whole project structure](code-and-test-structure.png){width=300}

> You can run individual tests from the context menu or use the shortcut. One more option is to use Gradle tasks. For
> example, if you run the `allTests` task, every test in your project will be run with a corresponding test runner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of running tests individually, you can run multiple tests using Gradle tasks. For
example, if you run the `allTests` Gradle task, every test in your project will be run with a corresponding test runner.
```
I think it would be useful to describe or provide a screenshot where a user can find the `allTests` Gradle task in the IDE.

Author: I'm not sure we want to promote one option over the other, just adding one more way to run tests

> When you run tests, in addition to the output in your IDE, HTML reports are generated. You can find them in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run multiple tests via Gradle, in addition to the output in your IDE, HTML reports are generated. You can find them in
```
Or are HTML reports also generated when running an individual test via other methods?

Author: They are, it's not specific to Gradle allTests

the `shared/build/tests` directory:

![HTML reports for multiplatform tests](shared-tests-folder-reports.png){width=300}

> Examine the report for the `allTests` task. You'll see that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the `allTests` task and examine its report. You'll see that:
```

> * The Android and iOS tests depended on the common tests.
> * The common tests are always run before platform-specific ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Android and iOS tests depend on common tests.
* Common tests are always run before platform-specific ones.
```

![HTML report for multiplatform tests](multiplatform-test-report.png){width=700}

> When writing tests, remember:
>
> * Tests in the `commonTest` source set should only use multiplatform libraries, like
    the [kotlin.test](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/kotlin.test/) API, to implement the testing functionality.
> * Platform-specific tests can use the functionality of the corresponding framework.
> * The `Asserter` type from the `kotlin.test` API should only be used indirectly.
> * Tests can be run both from the IDE and using Gradle tasks.
> * HTML test reports are automatically generated when you're running tests.
>

> {type="tip"}

Author: I agree that we need to get rid of the repetition here and use more general wording since these recommendation are not only about writing tests

## What's next?

* Explore the layout of multiplatform projects in [Understand Multiplatform project structure](multiplatform-discover-project.md).

> * Check out other multiplatform testing frameworks that the Kotlin ecosystem provides.

Author: I'll rephrase it so that this particular lib is recommended
